Introduction
############

We are surrounded by operating systems.
Each device where multiple software functions are consolidated on a single
CPU employs some sort of operating system that multiplexes the physical
CPU for the different functions.
In our age when even mundane household items get connected to the internet,
it becomes increasingly hard to find devices where this is not the case.

; maybe we could replace CPU by "platform", "hardware", or "device"?
; that would include any hardware resource esp. RAM beside the CPU too.

Our lives and our society depend on an increasing number of such devices.
We have to trust them to fulfill their advertised functionality and
to not perform actions that are against our interests. But are those devices
trustworthy? In most cases, nobody knows that for sure. Even the device
vendors are unable to guarantee the absence of vulnerabilities or hidden
functions. This is not by malice. The employed commodity software stacks are
simply too complex to reason about them.
Software is universally known to be not perfect.
So we have seemingly come to accept the common practice where vendors
provide a stream of software and firmware updates that fix
vulnerabilities once they become publicly known.
Building moderately complex systems that are free from such issues appears to be
unrealistic.
Why is that?


Universal truths
----------------

The past decades have provided us with enough empirical evidence about
the need to be pragmatic about operating-system software.
For example,
high-assurance systems are known to be expensive and struggle to scale.
Consequently, under cost pressure, we can live without high assurance.
Security is considered as important. But at the point where the user gets
bothered by it, we have to be willing to compromise. Most users would agree that
guaranteed quality of service is desirable. But to attain good utilization
of cheap hardware, we have to sacrifice such guarantees.
Those universal truths have formed our expectations of commodity
operating system software.

[tikz img/assurance_vs_scalability]

In markets where vendors are held liable for the correctness of their
products, physical separation provides the highest assurance for the
independence and protection of different functions from each other.
For example, cars contain dozens of electronic control units (ECU) that
can be individually evaluated and certified. However, cost considerations
call for the consolidation of multiple functions on a single ECU.
At this point, separation kernels are considered to partition the
hardware resources into isolated compartments. Because the isolation is
only as strong as the correctness of the isolation kernel, such kernels
must undergo a thorough evaluation. In the face of being liable,
an oversight during the evaluation may have disastrous consequences for the
vendor. Each line of code to be evaluated is an expense. Hence, separation
kernels are minimized to the lowest possible complexity - up to only a
few thousand lines of code.

The low complexity of separation kernels comes at the cost of being
inflexible. Because the hardware resources are partitioned at
system-integration time,
dynamic workloads are hard to accommodate. The rigidity of the approach
stands in the way whenever the number of partitions, the assignment of
resources to partitions, and the software running in the partitions have to be
changed at runtime.

Even though the high level of assurance as provided by separation kernels is
generally desirable, flexibility and the support for dynamic workloads is even
more so. For this reason, commodity general-purpose OSes find their way into
all kinds of devices except into those where vendors are held liable for the
correctness of their products.
The former include not only household appliances, network gear, consumer
electronics, mobile devices, and certain comfort functions in vehicles but
also the IT equipment of governments, smart-city appliances, and surveillance
systems.
To innovate quickly, vendors accept to make their products reliant
on highly complex OS foundations. The trusted computing base (TCB) of all
commodity general-purpose operating systems is measured in millions of
lines of code. It comprises all the software components that must be trusted
to not violate the interests of the user. This includes the kernel, the
software executed at the system start, all background services with system
privileges, and the actual application software.
In contrast to separation kernels, any attempt to assess the correct functioning
of the involved code is shallow at best. The trustworthiness of such a
system remains uncertain to vendors and users alike.
The uncertainty that comes with the staggering TCB complexity becomes a
problem when such systems get connected to the internet:
Is my internet router under control of a bot net? Is my mobile phone remotely
manipulated to wiretap me? Is my TV spying on me when switched off? Can I
safely store a sensitive document on my computer?
Faithfully, we hope the answers to those question to be no. But because
it is impossible to reason about the trusted computing base of the employed
operating systems, there are no answers.

Apparently, the lack of assurance must be the price to pay for the
accommodation of feature-rich dynamic workloads.


[tikz img/security_vs_ease_of_use]

The ease of use of software systems is often perceived as diametrical to
security. There are countless mundane examples: Remembering passwords
of sufficient strength is annoying. Even more so is picking a dedicated
password for each different purpose. Hence, users tend to become lax about
choosing and updating passwords. Another example is PGP. Because setting up
PGP for secure email communication is perceived as complicated,
business-sensitive information is routinely exchanged unencrypted. Yet another
example is the lack of adoption of the security frameworks such as SELinux.
Even though they are readily available on commodity OS distributions,
comprehending and defining security policies is considered as a black art,
which is better left to experts.

How should an operating system strike the balance between being unusably
secure and user-friendly insecure?


[tikz img/utilization_vs_accountability]

Current-generation general-purpose OSes are designed to utilize physical
resources like memory, network bandwidth, computation time, and power in the
best way possible. The common approach to maximize utilization is the
over-provisioning of resources to processes. The OS kernel
pretends the availability of an unlimited amount of resources
to each process in the hope that processes will attempt to allocate and
utilize as much resources as possible. Its holistic view on all processes
and physical resources
puts the kernel in the ideal position to balance resources between processes.
For example, if physical memory becomes scarce, the kernel is able to uphold
the illusion of unlimited memory by temporarily swapping the memory content of
inactive processes to disk.

However, the optimization for high utilization comes at the price of
indeterminism and effectively makes modern commodity OSes defenseless
against denial-of-service attacks driven by applications.
For example, because the network load is not accounted to individual
network-using applications, a misbehaving network-heavy application is able
to degrade the performance of other network applications. As another
example, any GUI application is able to indirectly cause a huge memory
consumption at the GUI server by creating an infinite amount of windows. If
the system eventually runs out of memory, the kernel will identify the GUI
server as the offender.

With the help of complex heuristics like process-behaviour-aware schedulers,
the kernel tries hard to uphold the illusion of unlimited resources when
under pressure. But since the physical resources are ultimately limited, this
abstraction is destined to break sooner or later. If it breaks, the
consequences may be fatal: In an out-of-memory situation, the last resort
of the kernel is to rampage and kill arbitrary processes.

Can an operating system achieve high resource utilization while still being
dependable?


Clean-slate approach
--------------------

Surprisingly, by disregarding the practical considerations of existing
commodity operating systems, the contradictions outlined above can be
resolved by a combination of the following key techniques:

:Microkernels: as a middle ground between separation kernels and
  monolithic kernels are able to accommodate dynamic workloads without
  unreasonably inflating the trusting computing base.

:Capability-based security: supposedly makes security easy to use by
  providing an intuitive way to manage authority without the need for
  an all-encompassing and complex global system policy.

:Kernelization: of software components aids the deconstruction of
  complex software into low-complexity security-sensitive parts and
  high-complexity parts. The latter no longer need to be considered
  as part of the trusted computing base.

:Virtualization: can bridge the cap between applications that expect
  current-generation OSes and a new operating-system design.

:The management of budgets: within hierarchical organizations shows how
  limited resources can be utilized and still be properly accounted for.

None of those techniques is new by any means. However, they have never
been used as a composition of a general-purpose operating system. This
is where Genode comes into the picture.


[tikz img/app_specific_tcb]
  Application-specific trusted computing base


Application-specific trusted computing base
-------------------------------------------

A Genode system is structured as a tree of components where each component
(except for the root of the tree) is owned by its parent. The notion of
ownership means both responsibility and control. Being responsible for
its children, the parent has to explicitly provide the resources needed by
its children out of its own resources. It is also responsible to acquaint
children with one another and the outside world. In
return, the parent retains ultimate control over each of its children. As the
owner of a child, it has ultimate power over the child's environment, the
child's view of the system, and the lifetime of the child.
Each child can, in turn, have children, which yields a recursive system
structure. Figure [img/app_specific_tcb] illustrates the idea.

At the root of the tree, there is a low-complexity microkernel that is
always part of the TCB. The kernel is solely responsible to provide
protection domains, threads of execution, and the controlled communication
between protection domains. All other system functions such as device drivers,
network stacks, file systems, runtime environments, virtual machines,
security functions, and resource multiplexers are realized as components
within the tree.

The rigid organizational structure enables the system designer to
tailor the trusted computing base for each component individually. For
example, by hosting a cryptographic function nearby the root of the tree,
the function is exposed only to the microkernel but not to complex drivers
and protocol stacks that may exist in other branches of the tree. Figure
[img/app_specific_tcb] illustrates the TCB of one leaf node. The TCB of the
yellow component comprises the chain of parents and grandparents because it is
directly or indirectly owned by them. Furthermore, the TCB comprises a
service used by the component. But the right branch of tree is
unrelated to the component and can thereby disregarded from the yellow
component's TCB.


Trading and tracking of physical resources
------------------------------------------

Unlike traditional operating systems, Genode does not abstract from physical
resources. Instead, each component has a budget of physical resources
assigned by its parent. The budget allows the component to use the
resources within the budget or to assign parts of its budget to its children.
The usage and assignment of budgets is a deliberative decision by each
component rather than a global policy of the OS kernel.
Components are able to trade resource budgets along the branches
of the tree. This way, components can offer services to other components
without consuming their own resources. The dynamic trading of resource
budgets between components allows for a high resource utilization without
the over-provisioning of resources. Consequently, the system behavior
remains deterministic at all times.


Operating-system framework
==========================

The Genode OS framework is the implementation of the Genode architecture.
It is a tool kit for building highly secure
special-purpose operating systems. It scales from embedded systems with as
little as 4 MB of memory to highly dynamic general-purpose workloads.

The system is based on a recursive structure. Each program is executed in a
dedicated sandbox and gets granted only those access rights and resources that
are required to fulfill its specific purpose. Programs can create and manage
sub-sandboxes out of their own resources, thereby forming hierarchies where
policies can be applied at each level. The framework provides mechanisms to
let programs communicate with each other and trade their resources, but only
in strictly-defined manners. Thanks to this rigid regime, the attack surface
of security-critical functions can be reduced by orders of magnitude compared
to contemporary operating systems.

The framework aligns the construction principles of microkernels with Unix
philosophy.
In line with Unix philosophy, Genode is a collection of small building blocks,
out of which sophisticated systems can be composed. But unlike Unix, those
building blocks include not only applications but also all classical OS
functionalities including kernels, device drivers, file systems, and protocol
stacks.

:CPU architectures:

  Genode supports the x86 (32 and 64 bit) and ARM CPU architectures.
  On x86, modern architectural features such as IOMMUs and
  hardware virtualization can be utilized.
  On ARM, Genode is able to take advantage of TrustZone technology.

:Kernels:

  Genode can be deployed on a variety of different kernels including
  most members of the L4 family (NOVA, Fiasco.OC, OKL4 v2.1, L4ka::Pistachio,
  Codezero, L4/Fiasco).
  Furthermore, it can be used on top of the Linux kernel to attain
  rapid development-test cycles during development.
  Additionally, the framework is accompanied with a custom kernel for
  ARM-based platforms that has been specifically developed for Genode and thereby
  further reduces the complexity of the trusted computing base compared to
  other kernels.

; base-hw was developed for ARM but now reaches out to x86 too...

:Virtualization:

  Genode supports virtualization at different levels:
  * On NOVA, faithful virtualization via VirtualBox allows the execution of
    unmodified guest operating systems as Genode subsystems. Alternatively,
    the Seoul virtual machine monitor can be used to run unmodified
    Linux-based guest OSes.
  * On the Fiasco.OC kernel, L4Linux represents a paravirtualized Linux
    kernel that allows the use of regular Linux distributions as well as
    Android.
  * With Noux, there exists a runtime environment for Unix
    software such as GNU coreutils, bash, GCC, binutils, and findutils.
  * On ARM, Genode can be used as TrustZone monitor.

:Building blocks:

  There exist more than 100 ready-to-use components such as
  * Device drivers for most common PC peripherals including networking,
    storage, display, USB, PS/2, Intel wireless, and audio output.
  * Device drivers for a variety of ARM-based SoCs such as Texas Instruments
    OMAP4, Samsung Exynos5, and FreeScale i.MX.
  * A GUI stack including a low-complexity GUI server, window management,
    and widget toolkits such as Qt5.
  * Networking components such as TCP/IP stacks and packet-level network
    services.


Licensing and commercial support
================================

Genode is commercially supported by the German company Genode Labs GmbH, which
offers trainings, development work under contract, developer support, and
commercial licensing:

:Genode Labs website:

  [http://www.genode-labs.com]

The framework is available under two flavours of licences: an open-source
license and commercial licensing.
The primary license used for the distribution of the Genode OS framework is
the GNU General Public License Version 2 (GNU GPL). In short, the GNU GPL
grants everybody the rights to

* Use the Genode OS framework without paying any license fee
* Freely distribute the software
* Modify the source code and distribute modified versions of the software

In return, the GNU GPL requires any modifications and derived work to be
published under the same or a GPL-compatible license. For the full license
text, refer to

:GNU General Public License Version 2:

  [http://genode.org/about/LICENSE]

For applications that require more permissive licensing conditions than
granted by the GNU GPL, Genode Labs offers the option to commercially
license the technology upon request. Please write to _licensing@genode-labs.com_.


About this document
===================

This document is split into two parts. Whereas the first part contains the
textual description of the architectural and practical foundations, the second
part serves as a reference of the framework's programming interface. This
allows the first part to stay largely clear from implementation details.
Cross-references between both parts are used to connect the conceptual level
with the implementation level.

Chapter [Getting started] provides engineering-minded readers with
a practical jump start to explore the code and experiment with it.
These practical steps are good to get a first impression and will hopefully
provide the motivation to engage with the core part of the book, which are
the Chapters [Architecture] and [Components].

Chapter [Architecture]
introduces Genode's high-level architecture by presenting the concept of
capability-based security, the resource-trading mechanism, the root of the
component tree, and the ways how components can collaborate without mutually
trusting each other. Chapter [Components] narrows the view on different types
of components, namely device drivers, protocol stacks, resource multiplexers,
runtime environments, and applications. The remaining part of the chapter
focuses on the composition of components.

Chapter [Development] substantiates Chapter [Getting started] with all
information needed to develop meaningful components. It covers the
integration of 3rd-party software, the build system, the tool kit for
automated testing, and the Git work flow of the regular Genode developers.

Chapter [System configuration] addresses the system integration. After
presenting Genode's holistic configuration concept, it details the usage of
the init component, which bootstraps the static part of each Genode system.

Chapter [Under the hood] closes the first part with a look behind the scenes.
It provides the details and the rationales behind technical decisions,
explains the startup procedure of components, shows how Genode's concepts are
mapped to kernel mechanisms, and documents known limitations.

The second part of the document gives an overview of the framework's
C++ programming interface. The content is partially derived from the actual
source code and supplemented with additional background information.


Acknowledgements and feedback
-----------------------------

This document greatly benefited from the feedback of the community at the
Genode mailing list, the wonderful team at Genode Labs, the thorough review
by Adrian-Ken Rueegsegger and Reto Buerki, and several anonymous reviewers.
Thanks to everyone who contributed to the effort, be it in the form of reviews,
comments, moral support, or through projects commissioned to Genode Labs.

That said, feedback from you as the reader of the document is always
welcome. If you identify points you would like to see improved or
if you spot grammatical errors, please do not hesitate to contact the
author by writing to _norman.feske@genode-labs.com_ or to post your feedback
to the Genode mailing list [http://genode.org/community/mailing-lists].




